In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure and verify RIP with a lab demo.
So, I've got the lab topology open here.
We've got 5 routers, R1 to R5, and you can see that all of the interfaces begin with a 10,
apart from this interface on R4, interface FastEthernet3/0, which is going out to the Internet.
We'll configure that one a little bit later.
So for now, let's configure all of the internal networks that all start with 10.
So, I'm going to configure that on all of the different routers. Actually, before I do that, let's just check
and see that there's no routing protocols running on here already.
So I'll do a
'show ip protocols',
and you can see there's no routing protocols running.
And if I just 'show ip route',
it's just the connected and the local routes.
So, I want to configure RIP on all of the different routers.
It's going to be the same commands on each one,
so rather than typing it in on each router each time, I'm going to use WordPad, and I'm going to copy
and paste from there.
So let's go to WordPad, and the commands are 'router rip',
I'm going to run 'version 2'.
I want to do 'no auto-summary',
I don't want to do automatic summarization at the classful boundaries, and it's going to be 'network 10.0.0.0'
on each router. And I should just do a 'config t' at the start to save me typing that in
each time and I will copy and paste this into each router.
So I'll start on R1, then R2, R3, R4, and R5. And it will take a minute or
so for the routers to converge,
so let's just check the 'show ip protocols' first.
And this is on R5,
I can see that RIP is running now, and it's routing for the 10.0.0.0 networks.
If I do a 'show ip route', let's see if we've got RIP routes in that table yet.
Yes we do,
I can see my connected and my local routes, and on R5,
I can see routes for the 10.1.X.X networks and individual routes for all of the different 10.0.X.X networks
as well. If I go back to the topology diagram, on R1,
I should see connected and the local routes for the 10.0.X.X networks, and routes learned via RIP for the
10.1.X.X networks. So, let's verify that. I'll do a 'show ip route' on R1, and I can see I've got all
of those individual 10.1.X.X networks learned through RIP. In the routing table, I can see that the Administrative
Distance is a 120, which is the standard AD for RIP, and I can see how many hops away
it is as well. Going back to the topology diagram again, I should have a route for the 10.1.2.0/24
network. I could go along the top path, but that would be 1, 2, 3 hops or the bottom
path, which is only 2 hops. So it is going to go out the bottom path, out interface fastEthernet3/0,
and the next hop address should be 10.0.3.2, with a hop count of 2. So let's verify
that, and I can see there's learned through RIP. There's the 10.1.2.0/24 network, the hop count
is 2, and it's via R5 at 10.0.3.2, out the fastEthernet3/0 interface. So that was the
basic configuration for RIP, I've now got reachability between all of my different internal networks.
The next thing I'll configure is summarization because you can see on R1 here that we've got all
of the individual 10.1.X.X networks listed separately. If I have a look back at the topology diagram,
I can see that all of the 10.1.X.X networks are available through either R2 or R5. So on R2
and R5, I'll configure summarization. I will summarize it to rather than the individual 10.1.X.X/24,
I'll summarize it to 10.1.0.0/16, and we do that on the interface
that we're advertising the summary route out of. So on fastEthernet0/0 on R2, and fastEthernet3/0
on R5 I'll do that summary 10.1.0.0/16 route.
I also want to do summarization in the opposite direction as well, so you can see that all of the
10.0.X.X networks are available out the right hand side,
on R2 and R5. So out interface fastEthernet1/0 on R2 and fastEthernet2/0
on R5, I'll advertise those as a summary address of 10.0.0.0/16, and that will
go to R3 and R4.
So, let's do that on R2 first.
So I'll jump onto its command line, and that was, the right hand side interface on R2 was interface
FastEthernet0/0.
This is the one it's facing R1, and I want to advertise the 10.1.X.X networks out
this interface. So the command is 'ip summary-address', I'll use tab completion for that. It's for the RIP
protocol, and that was the 10.1.0.0 networks, and I'll advertise it as a /16, so that's
255.255.0.0. In the opposite direction, that was on interface FastEthernet1/0, and 'ip summary-address
rip 10.0.0.0 255.255.0.0'. So, that is R2 done.
I also need to do R5, so I'll go to global configuration. On R5, the interface facing R1
is 'interface FastEthernet3/0', and I want to do 'ip summary-address rip', the '10.1.0.0'
networks, '255.255.0.0'. And in the other direction, it was 'interface FastEthernet2/0',
which is facing over to the left, and that's going to be 'ip summary-address rip 10.0.0.0
255.255.0.0.
Okay, so that's my summary routes configured on R2 and R5. So let's check, this is working now.
So I'll go back on to R1, and what I'll do is I'm going to restart RIP here. Normally, in a production
environment, you wouldn't want to do that, obviously, because you would lose your routes. You would just
wait for RIP to reconverge, but that can take a few minutes. So to speed things up here, I'll say 'config t',
and I'll do a 'no router rip', and then 'router rip', 'version 2', 'no auto-summary' and 'network 10.0.0.0'.
So I just restarted RIP there, just to force it to converge immediately. And now, if I do a
'show ip route', you see that rather than having all those individual 10.1.X.X/24 networks,
I've got a route for 10.1.0.0/16 and the individual networks are now removed
from the routing table. If we go back to the topology diagram, you see that when I did a summary route
on R2 and R5, well it's 1 hop from R1 to both of those.
So that's an equal cost, it's equal hop count, which is the RIP metric. So both of those go into the routing
table, and R1 will do equal cost load balancing over both of them. So that's why you can see for
10.1.0.0/16, I've got 2 routes, which have both got a hop count of 1. One is
going out FastEthernet3/0 to 10.0.3.2, which is on R5. The other one is out
FastEthernet0/0 to 10.0.0.2, which is R2. Okay, so that was our summarization configured.
Last thing I want to do is to give Internet connectivity everywhere.
So on R4, we've got a connection out to the service provider at 203.0.113.2.
On R4, I will add a default static route
going out to the service provider, and I'll then inject that into RIP, so that all of my other routers learn
about it. So let's go on to R4, and I want to do an IP route for 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0, so that's a default static
route,
and the next hop address is 203.0.113.2,
at the service provider.
Now, I could go on to all of my other routers and also configure a static default route on all of those
as well.
But to save me all that admin work instead, I inject it into RIP on R4. So the command to do that is
'router rip', and then 'default-information originate' and that will inject it into RIP.
And if I go back on to R1 again, and I'll just restart RIP on here again. So let me copy my config,
go back on to R1, 'config t', I'll do a 'no router rip' and then, restart RIP again.
I must've not copied that correctly,
I'll just type it in.
Okay, so 'router rip', 'version 2', 'no auto-summary', 'network 10.0.0.0',
and then if I do a 'show ip route',
it still needs to have gone through the other routers as well.
So let's see if it's showing up yet,
and there I can see, it's in RIP. I've got a default static route and it's going to the next hop of 10.0.3.2,
which is on R5, out interface FastEthernet3/0.
If I also look at R2 and do a 'show ip route' there as well,
I can also see that that default route is being propagated throughout my network.
Oh, one last thing that I want to do is I also, let's say that I want my routers to have a route
to that 203.0.113.0 network. Let's go back to the topology diagram.
So, let's say I want all of my other routers to have a route to the 203.0.113.0 network.
That's not happening right now, because I didn't have a network statement configured for that on R4.
So we'll add that with a network statement, but I don't want to advertise my internal network information
out to the service provider.
So, I'm going to make interface FastEthernet3/0 on R4 a passive interface. So, that's the last thing
to do.
Let's go on to R4 again, and under 'router rip', I will say 'passive-interface FastEthernet3/0',
and then 'network 203.0.113.0'.
Okay, that's done now,
and let's go back on to R1 again.
So you see that previously, I did not have a route for the 203.0.113.0 network on R1.
It might not have converged yet, so let's do the same again.
Let's restart RIP, so 'no router rip', 'router rip', 'version 2', 'no auto-summary', without a typo, and 'network 10.0.0.0'.
And if I do a 'show ip route' now,
hopefully, there's my route for the 203.0.113.0 network. But the service provider
router won't learn any of our internal routes because, if I go back to the topology diagram again, on FastEthernet3/0
on R4, I made that a passive interface. So, R4 is not going to advertise any RIP
routes out of that interface. Okay,
that was it.
That was our RIP configuration and verification.
I'll see you in the next section where we'll move on to EIGRP.